How might we begin to refactor the way we think with machines in a manner that serves intellectual expression and community in a way that affords rather than disregards care for each other,for the medium itself, but also more generally for the culture of futures or futurity. How would we refactor writing's techniques and the technologies in order to save ourselves from a future of 'purposelessness' a future where our intellectual expression is reduced to a means for sustaining a livlihood alone.

Where might we start with refactoring and rethinking writing as an activitity of collective and extended thought? When discussing the nvidia paper (part of yesterdays discussion - Liam presented a set of three papers one being about a neural net/machine intelligence project that could create a photorealistic  model/celebrity (given a set of celebrity faces)using a technique called a Generative Adverserial Network (GAN). The GAN is constituted of a 'generator' and a 'discriminator' - the generator learns what processes succeed in generating a succesful model given the discriminators feedback on output http://research.nvidia.com/publication/2017-10_Progressive-Growing-of (If only had such well dilineated creative processes). In discussion we noted that the output was super-normative... precisely because it is a difference that makes a difference when it comes aesthetic novelty. We all intuitively understand that aesthetics is in large part the function of an _intrigue_, a movement of thought, irreducible to description precisely because it is based on being in excess of the norm, even in excess of extra-aesthetic reduction. (Masssumi's discussion of Sinatra's eyes...'as too blue'). 

The _selection_ of a difference, of novelty as valued and valuable is where machine learning and machines inevitably fall short because they are never intrigued by novelty (as far as I have experienced - I'd love to hear otherwise). Machine confusion doesn't render as curious or curiosity - and beauty is always a thing _of_ curiosity (that is to sya beauty is always and first, curious). In fact programming curiosity might be a fascinating computational/mechatronic challenge (I have some ideas as to how this might proceed - robotic 'skin' - the instrumental incorporation of pain and its aniticpation as the basis for an extension of thought might be a place to start). The machine learning algorithm works well in gaming because we can stipulate the conditions for a 'win'.  This was what interested us in the second paper presented by Liam - the case of a machine learning algorithm capable of beating humans at the overwhelmingly complex board game 'go'. What was noted as remarkable was that the machine produced ways of winnning that had been previoulsy unthought. These were alien algorithmic  startegies such that produced a novel aesthetic  of the game in process. The architecture of the game produced something new when the machine was allowed to route around habit, culture and agency. In this route the game-alogithm complex produced an aesthetic intrigue that is in fact far more interesting than its potenital to 'win' according to defined terms. In recognisinig this aethetic intrigue we humans have shifted the goal posts... 'Nice' win isn't simply a win - its a win that exposes a novel aspect of the game itself. The machine intelligence is here is more than simply algorithm its a complex play of intrigue between human, game and algorithm combined, a machinic extension of the game/body potential to produce novelty in the porcess of its execution/play. Machine's are a powerful means for producing novelty, routing around habit and the tendency to simple amplification (of a previously defined win (which Ramachandran mistook as a defintion of intrigue rather than its shortcut/shaorthand) they are hopeless at realising when a particular novelty is interesting. The most interesting thing in the case of both papers was not that an algorithm could 'think better than us' but that it could produce novelty - aesthetic intrigue, a new dymamic of the game in process - that it could never 'select' for and we couldn't have imagined...we needed the autonomy of the machine to afford the realisation of a novel aesthteic or conceptual intrigue between body an world.

As someone put it nicely yesterday (to paraphase from memory) 'in the arts and humanities we dont know how to win - but we know it when we see it'. Another way of thinking that through might be to suggest that its the invention of the game, the realisation of what it means to 'win', that the human body is well equipped for. Unfortunately this means that machines of all kinds, including those that I mentioned that particularly worried me - the officious and bureaucratic - know well, and are improving everyday, at how best to incorporate us (the body) more effectively. Machines can learn to entrain and incorporate humans very effectively because the 'win' is simply defined as more clicks - the machine can effectively produce more 'win' without ever requiring an understanding of how such a 'win' feels. Perhaps there are ways to hack and invert this generative capacity to novel ends - or perhaps the ends are novel enough if they cycle back to potentialise thought. We must work with abstractions that serve our autonomic thinking-feeling - rather than with systems that exploit that thinking feeling in the service of their own feral continuity.


## Notes on Feral Abstractions : Frankenmonsters in Education.

So as my bio states I'm apparently here under the guise of Polygon Door -a private creative tech lab I set up with another precarious university worker to explore the possibilty of forging an academic life outside of and away from the rolling casual 'contracts' of our precarious university existence. 

Under that guise I've spent the last year or so playing/designing/programming and teaching with programmable drawing machines - robots that draw - an open source riff on the old Turtle Bot idea originating with Seymour Papert but which had largely disappeared in contemporary learning and teaching. We developed the robot following a series of workshops where students developed and executed there own ideas on the Arduino microcontoller. Those workshops were a lot of fun but the output tended to be 'a game', and alarm, a sensor - that is buttotn and sensors seem to write themsleves into executable projects according to there affordances. Learning and teaching technical skills didn't result in creative agency (of course). We tried a number of variations including the use of narrative and aesthetics. We found aesthetics as an ideal vehicle for routing around an instrumental approach to creative technology.

Once the robot was built we wrote an api, and designed a pedagogy, for exploring creativity as a process of experimentation and observation. While the robot appeals - because _robot_ - the power of the device is that it routes around the notion that knowledge production, creative thinking, aesthetic invention - occurs in the head - as Papert has apparently written (although I can't source the citation immediately) - this is an 'object to think with'. It has been a lot of fun watching students learn the power of an algorithm to realise and extend novelty, to explore creative thinking and, yes innovation, as based in action and observation. Students (a parents/teachers) think they students are learning 'robotics' but what they actually learn is to think creatively, to learn to learn, by acting and observing and acting again. At some point a local high school took an interest and we 'pivoted' to that opportunity because some advisor told us thats what tech start-ups do (another bad abstraction for another day). Teachers love our little machine because students learn with it but Principals love it cause it ticks the STEM and Digital Curriculum box. The kits sell themselves but at some point I realised I am not really interested in selling tech to schools. It doesn't work - in spite of the robots demonstrated value and success. Once in the schools the robots tend to sit on shelves in 'maker spaces' equipped with mostly unused 3D printers. The robots serve a weird kind of purpose. They service a feral abstraction which cares nothing for their potential value as mechanism of knowledge production or for learning and teaching. They tend not to fit into a packed disciplinary curriculum in which outcomes are carefully stipuated monitored and ticked off. There is no time for open discovery - except when spare time is carved out as an exception. The best learning happens outside of class in spaces and times carved out of daily rigmarole by champion teachers. But even those champions are eventually forced back to class. Design and art teachers don't have time to engage with the complexities of code. Art spaces aren't fitted with computers. Computer spaces dont have space for electronics or drawing. Design and tech spaces are hampered by limited face time and a lack of technical expertise and interdsciplinary persepctive. Maths is purely framed as exam skills preparation.

Part of the issue is that technology alone is a bad abstraction for solving problems in learning and teaching (LMS's anyone?) and our problems in learning and teaching are tied to a monsterous machinic hybrid of policy, architecture, infrastructure and affect that has its own feral or perhaps zombie continuity. Technology alone can't refactor the bad abstractions at the heart and continuity of our education system - what is required is a refactoring of the abstractions of what it means to learn - and this would require us to begin again - to experiment with new abstractions. How the hell is that possible in the face of such a monstorous and multifacted continuity - under the demands on teachers to audit students, schools to audit teachers, and so on, and so on. 

The same intervention is required in the realm of academic knowledge prodcution - I'm sure there are one or two academics that will empathise with my robots. The problem is not technical - it's zombie infrastructural, 

## Notes on Feral Abstractions 2 : It's the abstraction stupid.

I also teach media art at UOW. One of the things I do there is that  I use aesthetics and code to teach _abstraction_. It tooks me a long time to understand that this is what united my love of theory and making as 'new' media. I know its an unpopular term, given away to 'digital' - a dumb concession that saw us lose our nascent disicpline before it had begun to develop... but that is another story - digital as a mistaken abstraction of new media.

Good programming is all about abstraction. Thats is its core activity. It is not principally about technical skills. Find a good abstraction and a program will write itself - teach a programmer abstraction and they will learn to code themselves. When we teach programming in media arts at UOW or at Polygon Door we immerse students in a study of an aesthetic - Perhaps Manfred Mohr, or Bridget Riley, Frider Nake - some computational, some simply abstreact modermism. In doing so we shift the emphasis away from technical skills to the abstraction of an aesthetic. In pursuit of an aesthetic Student's realise and are immersed in its complexity. Sometimes they realise that they need to refactor their program because the aesthetic wasn't about circles (for instance) after all - the aesthetic drives the programming the programming immerses the student in an aesthetic. If the program becomes hard to write - its probably a bad abstraction and its time to refactor  - to rewrite the program starting with a different set of assumptions...a different abstraction. This approach successfully shifts the emphasis away from technical skill acquisition and technology more generally. Learning programming as skills acquisition is a technqiue based on a bad abstraction- that programming is about learning a language, about syntax. It also means my students occasionally produce interesting art. Their art is interesting because for the most part it avoids looking like yet another creative coding processing sketch. Creative coding sketches in the wider tend to look kind of similar. Their aesthetic is driven by what Processing's abstractions like to do when they succesfully outsource their affect to humans - produce lots of processing sketches. Same goes for any technical architecture. 90% of sound art sounds like PD/Max. 90% of presentations are a list of points until some tech person goes- wait a minute there must be a technical solution to that and then 50% of those 90% and up swirling incohate, motion sickness inducing, presy presentations.

## Notes on Feral Abstractions 3:  Livelihood as Abstraction Part 1 - Clean Trails.

One of my Life's obsessions is endurance trail running. My sport was until recently a quaint backwater of amatuerism. No-one was making any money - people actually did it 'for the running'. There was a spiritual aspect to the pursuit that was almost anti-professional. That has changed, more people entered the sport, a market grew, a social media presence grew, events were streamed, more people entered the sport, athletes got sponsored, events became profitable, events got prize money, athletes have started to eek out a _livelihood_. 

All of a sudden drugs are a problem in trail running where before the notion of taking drug to complete or compete in a trail run would have been absurd - counter to the reason for doing it. A feral abstraction has taken hold. For a set of elite runners, trail running is now only secondarily about running. Its about livelihood. It seems that running clean and independently is a bad abstraction for livlihood, for genrating a large social media presence. It needed refactoring - so now trail running is an industry and it is no longer just about the running.This is good for the sport apparently- the professionalism that is. Drugs are always bad - the problem is always the Dirty Runner... not the bad abstraction that sees performance enhancement as the right abstraction for generating a livlihood in a realm in which competing means training full-time. It has now suddenly begun to dawn on us all.. we got it round the wrong way...running isn't meant to be the abstraction for industry and it turns out that industry is a really shitty abstraction for clean running- but the Brumby has bolted...the feral abstraction is loose. What I want to think about here is not the problem of drugs in sport but he problem of a feral abstraction that sees the simple joy of running abstracted by the demands of professionalisation, running as a terrible abstraction of livelihood, professionalism as a terrible abstraction of running. I want to gesture toward a lost amateurism where a measure of amatuerism is a means of auditing the culture for feral abstractions taken hold. We could make the same argument for music, art and of course writing, thinking.  

##  Notes on Feral Abstractions 3:- Livliehood as abstraction Part 2 - Knowledge Production.

The workshops framing statement says that 'for years academics have submitted to the poltical economy of the publishig industries' for 'esteem, prestige, job security (?), an outlet for intellectual expression, a basis for research money and some sense of community. The first three of these, esteem, prestige, and job security? are great abstractions of human affect in the service of sustaining a publishing industry. Its the right abstraction for the publishing industry and has trumped the latter two abstractions (community and intellectual expression). The industry has abandoned those last two (intellectual expression and community) because it turns out that providing an outlet for intellectual expression and commmunity are not great abstractions of affect in the service of an industry. 

But wait.... I've got it all round the wrong way... we didn't want an industry... we wanted knowledge production. Commmunity and Intellectual expression weren't meant to be abstractions they were meant to be abstractions for industry -  the publishing industry was meant to be an abstraction for them. 



--------------

Deleted paragraph post edit... not needed anywhere and repeated

I want to return to a disucusssion we had yesterday base on Liam's account of those three instances of machine learning. We were speaking about the anxiety produced of the way machine learning seemed to be able to 'think better' than we can - to beat us at our own games. But at the same time we discussed the notion that the alien game play of the machine seemed to divulge something novel about the game itself - new ways of playing - new potential for aesthetic intrigue in the play of the machine itself. This was the most interesting thing about these examples - the production of a weird uncanny morphing of heavily touched up faces, the realisation of a new aesthetic intrigue in the alien play of the machine, the realisation of ways and means of playing beyond our existing and dominant habits and processes - all of which  exist neither within the machine, nor within the body but in their relation - there is a thinking with the machine here that can't be done without either the machines potential for an autonomy of sorts or the human bodies potenital for realising a difference that makes a difference. So while machine's are a powerful means for producing novelty they are hopeless at realising when a particular novelty is interesting. The most interesting thing in both cases was not that an algorithm could 'think better than us' but that it could produce novelty - aesthetic intrigue, new understanding of the game - that it could never 'select' for and we couldn't have imagined...we needed the autonomy of the machine to afford the realisation of a novel aesthetic or conceptual intrigue between body and world. Perhaps this is an interesting place to look for novel abstractions... to hack the archive...but can i do it from the beach??

___

